Hello, hello hello, and welcome to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English.
The show where you can listen to
fascinating stories, and learn weird
and wonderful things about the world at
the same time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and this is going
to be the last episode of 2022, so today
we are going to be talking about some
unusual news stories from the year,
stories that, even if you live in the
UK or you follow British news closely,
you might not have been aware of.
On our little journey we’ll come
across footballer’s wives, misbehaving
politicians, the changing demographics
of the country, a mad man with a
crossbow and the crime of high treason.
OK then, The Unusual British News of 2022.
It might sound like an understatement
to say that a lot has happened in the
UK since the first of January of 2022.
The country, as of the time of recording,
has had three different prime ministers,
experienced the hottest day on record,
and the British pound dipped to an
all-time low against the dollar.
But perhaps the biggest national change
is one you will no doubt be aware of.
The country lost a queen in Elizabeth
II, and got a new king, Charles the III.
So, our first category of unusual
news is going to be related to
this change in the monarchy.
But before you complain and say, hey,
you said this would be “unusual”,
and I already knew about this queen
that you people seem to like so much,
don’t worry, here you’ll learn what
I hope will be some unusual pieces
of news about the queen this year.
So, firstly, you probably already knew
that on February the 6th the Queen
celebrated her Platinum Jubilee, her
70th anniversary as queen of the country.
You might not have known that on June
the 12th of this year she became the
second-longest serving monarch in world
history, overtaking the king of Thailand.
She didn’t quite manage to
claim first position, however.
This is still held by King Louis
XIV of France, although he did get
a significant headstart on Queen
Elizabeth II, because he became
king when he was a mere 4 years old.
And if you are wondering whether
Charles, her son, will manage to beat
his mother, well let me just tell
you that he would have to live until
his 144th birthday to manage that.
But while his mother, Queen Elizabeth,
did manage to live to a ripe old 96
years old, it might surprise you to find
out that on Christmas Day last year,
in fact, an armed intruder was arrested
after attempting to break in to Windsor
Castle, where the queen was staying, where
he was planning to assassinate her with
a crossbow, a powerful bow and arrow.
Sure, this was technically news from
2021, but the unusual news from 2022
about this case is that in August of
2022, the man who attempted to kill
the queen became the last person to be
charged with treason, with the crime of
attempting to kill the head of state.
Interestingly enough, there is an act
of parliament, called the 1842 Treason
Act, that constitutionally allows for
someone to be charged for the crime
of attempting to harm the queen.
Fortunately, she passed away peacefully in
her bed on September the 8th, she wasn’t
shot by a madman with a bow and arrow, but
it is certainly interesting and refreshing
that English law has an Act ready to
punish anyone who attempts such a crime.
Now, our second “unusual” British
news story of 2022 also relates to
the law, and this is a trial that
was dubbed by the British press
as the “Wagatha Christie” trial.
In practical terms, it was
a trial between two women,
Rebekah Vardy and Coleen Rooney.
You might not have heard of these
two women before, but you may
have heard of their husbands:
Jamie Vardy and Wayne Rooney.
If you haven’t heard of them, they are
both famous English football players.
So, why were these two women
fighting each other in court?
Well, the story went something like this.
There were articles coming out in
the British press about the private
life of Coleen Rooney, stories
that she wanted to remain private
and not get leaked to the press.
She thought that one of her
Instagram followers was passing
information about her private
life to the tabloid newspapers.
She suspected that it was
Rebekah Vardy, the wife of her
husband’s England teammate.
So, what did she do?
Well, she planted “fake” stories
to try to catch Rebekah Vardy out.
There is a setting on Instagram where
you can choose to only show your
Instagram Stories to certain people,
so Coleen Rooney selected to only
show certain stories to Rebekah Vardy.
Then if these stories appeared in the
British tabloids, ta-dah, she would know
that it was Vardy who was responsible
for passing them on to the journalists.
Low and behold, the stories
did appear in the press.
In 2021, Rooney shocked her followers
when she revealed this plot on
Twitter, and accused Rebekah Vardy
of having sold these stories.
Naturally, Vardy denied
it, she said it wasn’t her.
She didn’t need the money, and why would
she do something like that to her friend?
What’s more, she took Rooney to court
for something called “libel”, which
is the crime of accusing someone in
public and harming their reputation.
But Coleen Rooney stood firm,
and the pair met in court.
It was an extensive trial,
with the British press calling
Coleen “Wagatha Christie”.
A “wag”, by the way, is a nickname
for the wives and girlfriends of
footballers, it comes from the acronym
W-A-G, WAG, wives and girlfriend.
And Agatha Christie was a famous British
crime writer, so Rooney acquired this
nickname because of her combined status
as “wag” and excellent detective.
On the 29th of July of 2022, the
court announced its judgement.
The jury concluded that there was
enough evidence to suggest that Vardy
had actually been guilty of leaking the
stories, and the case was thrown out.
The trial itself was almost like a comic
soap opera, or a bad Agatha Christie
novel, with Vardy’s agent claiming to
have dropped her phone into the North
Sea by accident, and Vardy’s supposed “IT
expert” to have forgotten the password
to important encrypted messaging data.
It turned out that Rebekah Vardy had lost
more than her dignity or a mobile phone.
The judge ordered her to pay Coleen
Rooney’s legal costs as well as her own,
with the entire debacle estimated to have
cost her £3 million pounds, so that’s
almost three and a half million Euros.
Now, our third category of “unusual news”,
after the royals and the footballers’
wives, is relating to a category of people
you might not expect to be misbehaving.
Or perhaps you would
completely expect it of them.
And this is politicians.
2022 was a year of some pretty bad
behaviour by British politicians.
First, as you may remember, the British
Prime Minister, Boris Johnson, was
mired in controversy for the first
half of the year for having held a
series of parties at 10 Downing Street,
at the home of the Prime Minister.
In normal times, of course, there
would be nothing wrong with this,
especially for a prime minister
who has made no secret of the fact
that he enjoys having a good time.
But these parties had taken place
during strict COVID lockdowns, so while
the Prime Minister was on TV telling
people that they shouldn’t leave their
houses or socialise with anyone, he
was proved to be having extensive
gatherings that went completely against
the rules that he himself had set out.
In classic Boris Johnson style, he
tried to get out of these accusations,
saying that he knew nothing about them
and that he was sure that all of the
rules had been followed, but as the
months went on, more and more details
emerged, including that Boris Johson
knew exactly what had happened and
had been at many of these parties.
So, that’s certainly bad behaviour, and
was one of the many reasons that Johnson
was forced to resign in July of 2022.
Now, the second “political misbehaviour”
is a very unusual one indeed, and
I’ll leave you to decide for yourself
how it compares to the behaviour of
Boris Johnson and the parties, or
partygate as it was dubbed by the press.
In April of 2022, a group of female
Conservative members of parliament,
or MPs, met with a senior politician
to discuss the issue of sexism in
Westminster, in British politics.
One of the women complained that she
had been sitting next to a male MP
who had been watching pornography on
his phone in the House of Commons,
in the Houses of Parliament.
If you have seen pictures or videos of the
House of Commons, yes I’m talking about
those long benches with green cushions,
the centre of the British parliament.
She didn’t name the man, but he was later
revealed to be an MP called Neil Parish.
And what did Mr Parish say?
Did he deny it?
Did he say it couldn’t possibly have
been him, or that his colleague must
have been mistaken in what she saw?
He didn’t, actually, but his
excuse wasn’t bought by everyone.
He said that he was searching
for tractors, and had stumbled
across a pornography website,
and he had continued to watch.
He also admitted that he had watched
porn in the House of Commons a second
time, and that time he had skipped the
tractors and went straight for the porn.
Although his boss, Boris Johnson, had
survived multiple scandals, some perhaps
even more saucy than this, it was too much
for Parish, and he was forced to resign
his position as member of parliament.
He does still claim that he was
initially looking for tractors, and
I’ll leave you to decide whether
you believe him on that count.
Our third political misbehaviour
story is a slightly darker one, but
it is important, and goes to show how
much this behaviour was tolerated in
Westminster, so much so that it has
been dubbed “Pestminster” by the press.
In July of 2022, another Conservative
politician, a man named Chris Pincher,
was forced to resign after it emerged that
there were a whole range of accusations
of sexual assault against him dating
back 10 years, going back a decade.
The culmination of all of this had been
the events of one evening, on the 30th of
June, when Pincher had gone to a private
club in an exclusive area of London, drunk
too much and sexually assaulted two men.
Nasty stuff indeed, but it would
have far-reaching consequences.
It turned out that Boris Johnson, the
then Prime Minister, knew all about
Pincher’s reputation, even joking that he
was “Pincher by name, pincher by nature”.
If you are a pincher, by the way, it means
you grab or take something from someone
that you shouldn’t, or you touch them
inappropriately, without their permission.
Anyway, Boris Johnson knew all
about Pincher’s reputation,
yet he still appointed him to a
senior position in government.
And this was the straw that broke
the camel’s back for Johnson, the
nail in the coffin in his tenure
as Prime Minister, and he was
forced to resign a few days later.
Now, you might be surprised to hear
that we aren’t going to talk about
Liz Truss at all in this episode.
And that’s for two reasons.
Firstly, it’s not completely unusual,
and although there are plenty of unusual
and unexpected bits of her chaotic
44 days in charge of the country,
you probably know some of it already.
And the second reason is that
there is just so much to unpack,
so we can’t do it justice in a
small five minute section here.
The good news is that we did just do
an entire episode on the mad and tragic
44 days of Liz Truss, so if you haven’t
listened to that one already, then that
one's for you, it’s episode number 327.
Now, the final piece of unusual news
is something that lots of people aren’t
aware of outside the UK, and many people
aren’t aware of even inside the UK.
And this is related to the shifting
demographics of the country, specifically,
the increasing multiculturalism of the UK.
This isn’t “news”, in so much as
it's a gradual change, but there
are some important pieces of news
to mention that highlight the
increasing diversity of the country.
The first piece of “unusual news”
is related to the publication of the
results of the national Census, a big
survey that is done of the UK population
every 10 years, which tries to answer
questions like “how many people live
in the country?” and “who are they?”.
The results started to be published
this year, and had, for some,
surprising results, especially
with the fact that the UK has been
painted by many outside the country
as anti-foreigner and anti-immigrant.
Of course, the Brexit vote gave people
a pretty good reason to think that
this was the case, but the results of
the Census show that the country is
different to what a lot of people think,
and it is indeed much more multicultural
than many large European countries.
So, it might surprise you to find
out that one in every six people in
England and Wales was born outside
the UK, a 33% increase from 2011.
If you’re interested, the top five
countries were, in this order, India,
Poland, Pakistan, Romania and Ireland.
This non-UK born population is highly
concentrated in the cities, which
tend to be more multicultural places.
One area of London, for example,
Brent, has 56% of its residents
who were born outside the UK.
Put simply, the UK is a lot more
multicultural and multinational
than many people think it is.
And this is particularly important when
one remembers that in the summer of 2022,
the Prime Minister of the country was
chosen only by members of the Conservative
Party, fewer than a hundred thousand
people voted for Liz Truss, and these
voters were overwhelmingly, 97%, white,
over half of them were over 60, and they
lived primarily in the south of England.
Essentially, the Prime Minister was
voted in by a tiny proportion of the
country’s population, and a proportion
of the population that was utterly
unrepresentative of the real electorate.
Now, as you’ll remember, the Prime
Minister that was chosen by the members
of the Conservative Party, Liz Truss,
didn’t do a very good job at all.
Nevertheless, her tenure as Prime
Minister did break some records, and not
only for the shortest time in office.
On September the 6th of this
year, when Liz Truss announced
her cabinet, a record was broken.
It was the first time in British
history that the “Great Offices of
State” didn’t contain a white man.
The “Great Offices of State” are the
most important political jobs in the
country: so that's the Prime Minister,
the Chancellor of the Exchequer, which
is basically the Minister of Finance, the
Foreign Secretary and the Home Secretary.
Now, these politicians might have been
trailblazers in terms of who they were,
but they were still useless politicians
and they did huge damage to the country.
As you may well know, after they were
booted out, the country then broke a
new record when it welcomed the first
non-white Prime Minister in the form of
Rishi Sunak, who has Indian heritage.
And another fun-fact about Rishi Sunak
is that, at 42 years old, he was the
youngest Prime Minister in 200 years.
Although Sunak might be representative
of the changing demographics of
the country, he has been criticised
for being pretty unrepresentative
in almost every other way.
Specifically, his bank balance
certainly is not representative of
the average person in the country.
When his wife’s fortune is taken
into account, Sunak holds the record
for being the richest ever British
Prime Minister, with a combined
fortune of almost a billion Euros.
So, there you have it,
the unusual news of 2022.
This year the UK has broken records
for the longest monarch, the world’s
longest-serving female monarch, the
richest Prime Minister, the youngest
Prime Minister, the shortest-serving
Prime Minister, it’s broken multicultural
records, it has seen some extremely
bad behaviour from politicians, and
last but not least, some exceptional
detective work from footballer’s wives.
OK then, that is it for today's episode
on The Unusual British News of 2022.
I hope it's been an interesting one,
and whether it’s footballers’ wives,
naughty politicians or the changing
make-up of the country, that you've
learnt something new about the UK.
As always, I would love to know
what you thought about this episode.
Are there any unusual stories from the
UK that you remember from this year?
Do you remember how the news of the
queen’s death was covered in your country?
What is the most unusual news
from your country this year?
I would love to know, so let’s
get this discussion started.
You can head right into our
community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds, by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.